= D-Bus Permissions

The permissions to access the D-Bus interface of `fatbuildrd` is controled using
https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/polkit/polkit/[polkit] service. Fatbuildr
classifies D-Bus calls in a set of _actions_ and delegates to polkit the
responsibility of checking users permissions on these actions against the
_policy_.

== Polkit Actions

The polkit actions defined in Fatbuildr are the following:

org.rackslab.Fatbuildr.view-task:: List and view detailed information of tasks
queue (pending and running tasks) and tasks archives.

org.rackslab.Fatbuildr.build:: Submit artifact build tasks.

org.rackslab.Fatbuildr.build-as:: Submit artifact build tasks with another user
identity.

org.rackslab.Fatbuildr.view-pipeline:: View definition of instances build
pipelines.

org.rackslab.Fatbuildr.view-registry:: View content of managed artifact
registries.

org.rackslab.Fatbuildr.edit-registry:: Submit tasks to edit content of managed
artifact registries (ex: delete artifact).

org.rackslab.Fatbuildr.view-keyring:: View keyring detailed information.

org.rackslab.Fatbuildr.edit-keyring:: Submit tasks to edit keyring (ex: change
expiry date).

org.rackslab.Fatbuildr.manage-image:: Submit tasks to create, update and open
interactive shell in container images and build environment.

org.rackslab.Fatbuildr.manage-tokens:: Manage JWT tokens used for authentication
to HTTP REST API.

NOTE: All `org.rackslab.Fatbuildr.*-as` actions are specifically designed for
services (such as Fatbuildrweb) that receive requests from several users and
have to submit tasks to `fatbuildrd` with these original users identity. Thus,
the permissions to these actions should be restricted to system users running
these services. Ordinary users do not need to have these permissions.

== Default Policy

By default in Fatbuildr, `*-as` special actions are restricted to _root_ super
user and `fatbuildr` system user. All other actions are granted to _root_ super
user and all members of `fatbuildr` system group (including `fatbuildr` system
user).

Users just have to be added to `fatbuildr` group to get access to essential
Fatbuildr D-Bus services. For example, run this command as root to add user
`john` in `fatbuildr` group:

[source,shell]
----
# usermod -a -G fatbuildr john
----

This default policy can be modified with additional polkit configuration files
as explained in the following section.

== Configuration Files

Polkit initially used the PKLA file format (PolicyKit Local Authority) and then
changed to more flexible authorization rules file format (Javascript based).
Unfortunately, some Linux distributions (ex: Debian, Ubuntu) do not support the
latest file format. For this reason, Fatbuildr supports both file formats, as
described in the following subsections.

=== Authorization Rules

Fatbuildr provides default vendor polkit rules located at
`/usr/share/polkit-1/rules.d/org.rackslab.Fatbuildr.rules`. This file must not
be changed or modifications will be lost on upgrades.

The rules defined in this file can be overriden by creating a new file
`/etc/polkit-1/rules.org.rackslab.Fatbuildr.rules`.

For example, to restrict modification of registries, keyrings and image
management to members of group `fatbuildr-admins`, the following rules can be
defined in this file:

[source,js]
----
// Restrict modifications of registries, keyring and images to members of
// fatbuildr-admins group
polkit.addRule(function(action, subject) {
    if ((action.id == "org.rackslab.Fatbuildr.edit-registry" ||
         action.id == "org.rackslab.Fatbuildr.edit-keyring" ||
         action.id == "org.rackslab.Fatbuildr.manage-image") &&
        subject.isInGroup ("fatbuildr-admins")) {
            return polkit.Result.YES;
        } else {
            return polkit.Result.NO;
        }
});
----

=== PKLA Files

Fatbuildr provides default vendor local authority file located at
`/var/lib/polkit-1/localauthority/10-vendor.d/fatbuildr.pkla`. This file must
not be changed or modifications will be lost on upgrades.

The rules defined in this file can be overriden by creating a new file
`/etc/polkit-1/localauthority/50-local.d/fatbuildr.pkla`.

For example, to restrict modification of registries, keyrings and image
management to members of group `fatbuildr-admins`, the following rules can be
defined in this file:

[source,ini]
----
[Allow members of fatbuildr-admins group to edit Fatbuildr registry content]
Identity=unix-group:fatbuildr-admins
Action=org.rackslab.Fatbuildr.edit-registry;
ResultAny=yes
ResultInactive=yes
ResultActive=yes

[Allow members of fatbuildr-admins group to edit Fatbuildr keyring]
Identity=unix-group:fatbuildr-admins
Action=org.rackslab.Fatbuildr.edit-keyring;
ResultAny=yes
ResultInactive=yes
ResultActive=yes

[Allow members of fatbuildr-admins group to manage Fatbuildr image and build environment]
Identity=unix-group:fatbuildr-admins
Action=org.rackslab.Fatbuildr.manage-image;
ResultAny=yes
ResultInactive=yes
ResultActive=yes

[Disallow members of fatbuildr group to edit Fatbuildr registry content]
Identity=unix-group:fatbuildr
Action=org.rackslab.Fatbuildr.edit-registry;
ResultAny=no
ResultInactive=no
ResultActive=no

[Disallow members of fatbuildr group to edit Fatbuildr keyring]
Identity=unix-group:fatbuildr
Action=org.rackslab.Fatbuildr.edit-keyring;
ResultAny=no
ResultInactive=no
ResultActive=no

[Disallow members of fatbuildr group to manage Fatbuildr image and build environment]
Identity=unix-group:fatbuildr
Action=org.rackslab.Fatbuildr.manage-image;
ResultAny=no
ResultInactive=no
ResultActive=no
----
