= Advanced Features

== Client-server Mode

Fatbuildr uses a xref:architecture.adoc#components[software architecture] with
multiple components following the client/server model. Also, `fatbuildrweb`
component provides a secure xref:usage:api.adoc[REST API] to offer `fatbuildrd`
services over HTTP protocol and TCP/IP networks.

This enables the possibility to deploy distributed setup with `fatbuildrd` and
`fatbuildrweb` components on a centralized server for a team of developpers
running `fatbuildrctl` and web browser on workstations.

All developers can share centralized and mutualized resources to build and
distribute software.

[#derivatives]
== Derivatives

Build pipelines can be defined with optional _derivatives_ that are
complementary distributions. These additional distributions can be used for
multiple purposes, such as distributing:

* Multiple versions of an artifact for a target environment (ex: version X and
  version Y for _el8_),
* Alternative versions of artifact (eg. with specific configuration flags) for
  particular hosts or hardware.

== Multi-Architectures

Fatbuildr supports building artifacts for basically any hardware CPU
architecture, including architectures non-natively compatible by the host system
(ex: build for ARM architecture on x86_64 host). This feature is possible thanks
to awesome qemu-user-static CPU emulation tool and Linux
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binfmt_misc[binfmt] registration. This feature is
available out-of-the-box in Fatbuildr without any additional setup required.

== Automatic Changelogs

Fatbuildr can be given the responsability of generating Deb and RPM packages
changelogs incrementally with successive builds. Developers do not need to
manually define packages changelog entries with its share of errors and
misinformation. Fatbuildr ensures packages changelog are always kept in sync
with package builds with a full history of publications in repositories.

== Incremental Versionning

When users submit artifact rebuild with the same version and release number,
Fatbuildr detect it and automatically increment the artifact release version.

This notably protect from situations where packages repositories host
successively slightly different binary artifacts with the same version number
and filename, leading to potential proxy cache or package database corruptions.

The feature also enables users the possibilty to rebuild artifacts, typically in
case of build dependencies update, without any further manual change in artifact
definition.

== Integrated Patchs Management

Fatbuildr provides integrated patchs queue management of upstream sources. It
creates a temporary Git repository with software upstream sources, and users can
add successive patches by directly creating commits on this Git repository. When
user is done, commits are exported into a series of patches.

These patches are automatically integrated by Fatbuildr within the artifact and
applied on sources at the beginning of the builds.

Users have an easy way to modify source codes of external software with their
own fixes and changes, and maintain this serie of patches for future versions of
this external software.

== Interactive Builds

Users can submit _interactive_ builds in Fatbuildr. In case of build failure,
users drop into an interactive shell in the targeted build environment for
debugging. Users can launch commands and even install additional tools to help
for diagnosis. Interactive sessions can also be shared by multiple users for
collaborative work.

[#prescripts]
== Prescripts

Users can define shell _prescripts_ for artifacts. These scripts can be used to
dynamically perform any modification in the software source tree before the
actual build of the artifact. These scripts are executed by Fatbuildr isolated
in the build environment with external network access.

These scripts are typically used to do _vendoring_ of external build
dependencies not available in Linux distribution package repositories (eg. Go or
javascript libraries).

The modifications realized by prescripts can either be exported to:

* An additional patch integrated in the artifact patch queue
* Or supplementary tarballs along the unmodified upstream tarball

[#unreleased]
== Support of Unreleased Software

Fatbuildr can generate source tarball out of a source tree, tagged with
user-provided version number, to build an artifact with this software. This
feature can be used to distribute versions of software that is not yet released
(eg. development version) or support software without publishing release model.

== Web Interface & REST API

The optional Fatbuildrweb component provides both a secure
xref:usage:api.adoc[REST API] and xref:usage:web.adoc[web interface] to
Fatbuildr instances. This web interface can be used to explore content of
artifact registries in graphical and intuitive manner.

== Advanced Security Model

Fatbuildr implements by default many security hardening features under the hood,
without additional complexity for end users and administrators:

* Checksums of externally downloaded software are systematically verified.
* Integrated GPG signing keyring are generated and protected with randomly
  generated passphrase.
* D-Bus services API permissions are controled using Polkit and configurable
  policy.
* Permissions to access REST API and web interface are managed with fine-grained
  xref:admin:web.adoc#policy[RBAC policy] and xref:usage:api.adoc#auth[JWT
  tokens based authentication].

== Resilient Service

The `fatbuildrd` daemon is a D-Bus activated service that starts automatically
when needed and stop after some time of inactivity to free the resources. It
includes a watchdog that detect internal failure and trigger automatic restart
for quick service recovering.
